Development began 05/02/2018


Goal:

Create a text adventure rpg in python based in the Dayz universe.

Dayz was originally a mod for Arma 2 in which players find themselves
on the coast of an unknown land in a post apocalyptic world where zombies 
roam the streets. 

They must survive against hunger, thirst, temperature, zombies, other players
(hostile or friendly) 

They must scavange for food, supplies and weapons to better deal with any
dangers they encounter. 

Dead is Dead.

---------DESIGN----------


CORE EXPERIENCE OF GAME (Most basic things to have a functioning, fun game):

Player with stats (health, hunger, thirst), inventory slots (limited), bleeding, 
Inventory: Weapons (melee, guns), medical (bandages, bloodbags, morphine)
	Player has ability to view and arrange inventory, get rid of unwanted stuff. Put them in loot piles where they remain (Maybe until player leaves that area, city)
	
Zombies - random encouters, shoot them with guns, hit them with melee weapons, take damage.
World - Start in 1 city, for example. Hospital, Firestation, houses, military tents.
	Moving between these locations
Loot piles which can be searched.





FULL GAME IDEAS (additionial things to implement over time once Core games is implemented)
Experience/Skills: Maybe to some extent but more a focus on 
how players react to different situations and encounters

World: Cities, towns, villages, Airfields, Farms, Coast, Wilderness
	Forest, Military bases.
	
	All areas accessable from wilderness, coast, forest to simulate the fact that
	the survivor could bypass towns, villages etc when going from one place to another. 

	Survivor can go from Chernogorsk to North West airfield, for example, by first going through the wilderness.
	However, donig this would drain hunger, thirst, temperature (if cold) a lot as it's a long way.
	Survivor could also choose to go from town to town along the way from Chernogorsk to NW airfield to have 
	the opportunity to restock on food and water.
  
	Procedurally generate villages or settlements when 

	Graph theory - nodes to simulate actual Dayz map, nodes in between towns, etc. 
	Distance between nodes determines how much hunger and thirst level increases. 

Feel: Some russian land, russian names, signs, etc.

Medical System:
	Health
	Broken bones
	Infection - Zombies, Dirty water

Survival:
	Boiling water
	Fire, axe, matches, 
	Hunger & Thirst slowly decrease.

Loot piles:
	Types of buildings (residential, military, farm)
	With 
	
Inventory:
	Weapons, ammo, food, medical, backpack, 
	clothes, 
Random encounters

Skills:

Weapons:

Combat:

Zombies: Alert status: Not alerted, Alerted, Enraged
	Headshot, bodyshots,
	Speed of movement?
	Damage (melee attack, biting, infection)

Humans:
Gunplay - cover, skill with weapons, weapons used
number of enemies


----------IMPLEMENTATION------------

Gameplay: Real-time (not turn based)

Combat - turn-based?

Function parser to allow input text commands such as:

apply bandage to leg, take pistol from backpack etc.


Classes:
Player, Inventory,


Item: Weapons(Melee, Guns), Clothes, Comsumables(Food, Water, Medical), Tools(can opener, compass, map, Axe, Flashlight)



World Design: Game world with ranged weapons, cover, etc will require some form of coordinate system.
